What is lazy evaluation in Spark and why does it matter?
Transformations (filter, map, join) build a logical plan but execute nothing. Execution only starts when an action is called (count, show, write). This lets Catalyst optimise the entire plan before running — e.g. pushing filters before joins to reduce data early.

What is the difference between a transformation and an action?
Transformations return a new DataFrame and are lazy — filter, select, join, groupBy, withColumn. Actions trigger execution and return a result — count, show, collect, write, take. Every Spark job ends with an action.

What is a DAG in Spark? How is it split into stages?
DAG = Directed Acyclic Graph. It's the execution plan Spark builds from your transformations. The DAG Scheduler splits it into stages at shuffle boundaries — every wide transformation (groupBy, join, distinct) creates a new stage. Within a stage, all tasks run in parallel.

What is the difference between narrow and wide transformations?
Narrow: each input partition maps to exactly one output partition. No data movement. Examples: filter, map, select, withColumn, union. Wide: output partitions depend on multiple input partitions — requires a shuffle (data moves across network). Examples: groupBy, join, distinct, repartition, orderBy.

What does the Catalyst optimizer do?
Catalyst takes your logical plan and applies optimization rules before execution: predicate pushdown (filters moved earlier), column pruning (unused columns dropped), join reordering, and constant folding. It then generates multiple physical plans and picks the cheapest one based on cost estimation.

What is the difference between RDD, DataFrame, and Dataset?
RDD: low-level, no schema, no Catalyst optimization, full control. DataFrame: distributed table with schema, Catalyst optimized, most common in PySpark. Dataset: type-safe DataFrame (Scala/Java only — not available in Python). In PySpark you almost always use DataFrames.

How do you handle data skew in Spark?
Skew = one partition has far more data than others, causing one task to run much longer. Solutions: 1) Salting — add a random prefix to the skewed key to spread data across more partitions. 2) Broadcast join — if one side is small, broadcast it to avoid shuffle entirely. 3) AQE skew join — Spark 3.x detects and splits skewed partitions automatically.
from pyspark.sql.functions import col, rand, concat, lit

df_salted = df.withColumn("salted_key",
    concat(col("join_key"), lit("_"), (rand()*10).cast("int")))

What is the difference between repartition() and coalesce()?
repartition(n): full shuffle, evenly redistributes data, can increase or decrease partitions. coalesce(n): no shuffle, merges partitions locally, can only decrease partitions. Use coalesce when writing fewer output files (cheaper). Use repartition when you need even distribution before a heavy operation.

What is a broadcast join and when do you use it?
A broadcast join sends the smaller DataFrame to every executor, so the join happens locally without a shuffle. Use when one side is small (default threshold 10MB, configurable). Eliminates the most expensive operation in Spark.
from pyspark.sql.functions import broadcast

df_result = large_df.join(broadcast(small_df), "id")

What is caching and when should you use it?
cache() / persist() stores a DataFrame in memory so it's not recomputed on every action. Use when a DataFrame is used multiple times in the same job. Don't cache everything — it wastes memory and can spill to disk. Always unpersist() when done.
df.cache()
df.count()  # triggers caching
df.filter(...).show()  # reads from cache
df.unpersist()  # free memory

Follow-up: "What's the difference between cache() and persist()?" — cache() = MEMORY_AND_DISK by default. persist() lets you specify storage level: MEMORY_ONLY, DISK_ONLY, MEMORY_AND_DISK, etc.

What is AQE (Adaptive Query Execution)?
AQE (Spark 3.0+) re-optimises the query plan at runtime using actual data statistics from completed stages. Three key features: 1) dynamically coalesces small shuffle partitions, 2) converts sort-merge joins to broadcast joins when a side turns out to be small, 3) handles skewed joins by splitting large partitions.
Enable with: spark.conf.set("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true"). On Databricks it's on by default. Mention this shows you're up to date with Spark 3.x.

What is exactly-once semantics in Spark Streaming?
Three delivery guarantees: at-most-once (data may be lost), at-least-once (data may be duplicated), exactly-once (data processed exactly once, no loss, no duplicates). Spark Structured Streaming achieves exactly-once by combining checkpointing (tracks offsets) with idempotent sinks or transactional writes.
You have this on your CV — "built Kafka + Spark Structured Streaming pipelines with exactly-once delivery." Be ready to explain HOW: checkpointing + Kafka offset tracking + writing to Delta Lake (which supports ACID transactions).

What is checkpointing in Spark Streaming?
Checkpointing saves the state of a streaming query to durable storage (ADLS, S3, HDFS). Tracks: 1) offsets read from source (e.g. Kafka partition offsets), 2) intermediate state for stateful operations (aggregations, joins). On failure, the query restarts from the last checkpoint — no reprocessing from the beginning.
df.writeStream \
  .format("delta") \
  .option("checkpointLocation", "/mnt/checkpoints/my_stream") \
  .start("/mnt/output/my_table")

What is watermarking and why is it needed?
Watermarking handles late-arriving data in streaming. It tells Spark: "wait up to X time for late data, then discard anything older." Without watermarking, Spark would keep state for all past events forever, causing unbounded memory growth. Watermark = event_time threshold below which late records are dropped.
df.withWatermark("event_time", "10 minutes") \
  .groupBy(window(col("event_time"), "5 minutes")) \
  .count()
Key follow-up: "What's the difference between event time and processing time?" — Event time = when the event actually happened (in the data). Processing time = when Spark received/processed it. Always use event time for accurate analytics.

How would you design a pipeline to process 5TB of data daily?
This is literally your Optum experience. Structure your answer: 1) Ingestion — ADF to land raw data in ADLS Bronze layer. 2) Processing — Databricks PySpark with partitioning on date/region to enable partition pruning. 3) Optimisation — broadcast small lookup tables, use AQE, tune shuffle partitions. 4) Output — write to Delta Lake (Silver/Gold) with Z-ordering on query columns. 5) Monitoring — structured logging, alerting on SLA breaches, data quality checks.
You have done this. Say: "This mirrors what I built at Optum — 5TB/day across PySpark pipelines on Databricks with ADF orchestration and Delta Lake as the storage layer." That answer is worth more than a textbook answer.

What is Delta Lake and why use it over plain Parquet?
Delta Lake adds ACID transactions, schema enforcement, time travel, and DML support (UPDATE, DELETE, MERGE) on top of Parquet files. Plain Parquet has none of these — no transactions, no updates, no rollback. Delta is the foundation of Medallion architecture (Bronze/Silver/Gold).
Key line: "Delta Lake gives us the reliability of a database with the scale of a data lake — that's why it's the default storage format on Databricks." You used this at Deloitte — mention it.

How do you optimise a slow Spark job?
Structured approach: 1) Open Spark UI — find the slowest stage, check shuffle read/write size. 2) Check for skew — one task taking 10x longer than others. 3) Check partition count — too few (underutilised) or too many (overhead). 4) Look for missing broadcast joins on small tables. 5) Check if expensive DataFrames are recomputed — add cache(). 6) Enable AQE if on Spark 3.x.

What are the different join types in Spark? When do you use each?
inner: only matching rows from both sides. left/right: all rows from one side, nulls for no match. full/outer: all rows from both sides. left_semi: rows from left where a match exists in right — no right columns returned. left_anti: rows from left where NO match in right. cross: cartesian product — every row with every row (dangerous at scale).
df1.join(df2, "id", "inner")
df1.join(df2, "id", "left")
df1.join(df2, "id", "left_semi")   # like WHERE EXISTS in SQL
df1.join(df2, "id", "left_anti")   # like WHERE NOT EXISTS in SQL
left_semi and left_anti are the most underrated join types — interviewers love asking about them because most candidates don't know them. left_semi is more efficient than inner join when you only need left columns.

What is a sort-merge join vs a broadcast join? How does Spark decide?
Sort-merge join: both sides shuffled, sorted, then merged. Used when both DataFrames are large. Expensive due to shuffle. Broadcast join: small side sent to every executor, join happens locally — no shuffle at all. Spark automatically picks broadcast when a side is under spark.sql.autoBroadcastJoinThreshold (default 10MB). You can force it with broadcast().
from pyspark.sql.functions import broadcast

result = large_df.join(broadcast(small_df), "id")
Say: "I always check table sizes before writing a join. If one side is a lookup/config table under 100MB I force a broadcast — it eliminates the shuffle entirely and is the single biggest performance win available."

How do you handle duplicate column names after a join?
When both DataFrames share a column name, Spark keeps both — causing ambiguity in subsequent operations. Three solutions: 1) alias the DataFrames and use qualified names, 2) drop the duplicate after join, 3) rename before joining.
df1 = df1.alias("a")
df2 = df2.alias("b")

result = df1.join(df2, col("a.id") == col("b.id"), "inner") \
            .select("a.id", "a.name", "b.salary")

result = df1.join(df2, "id", "inner")
result = result.drop(df2["salary"])
Common production bug — leaving duplicate columns causes AnalysisException on the next filter or select. Always clean up immediately after a join. Mentioning this proactively in interviews shows production experience.

What is a cross join and why is it dangerous?
Cross join = cartesian product — every row in left matched with every row in right. 1000 rows x 1000 rows = 1,000,000 rows. At scale this causes OOM errors and cluster crashes. Spark requires explicit crossJoin() or setting spark.sql.crossJoin.enabled=true to prevent accidental cross joins.
df1.crossJoin(df2)

spark.conf.set("spark.sql.crossJoin.enabled", "true")

Why is Parquet preferred over CSV in data pipelines?
Parquet is columnar — reads only the columns you need, not entire rows. CSV is row-based — reads everything. Parquet also has: built-in compression (Snappy, GZIP), schema embedded in the file, predicate pushdown support (skip row groups that don't match filters), and much smaller file size. CSV has none of these.
Key numbers to remember: Parquet is typically 5-10x smaller than CSV for the same data. Reading 3 columns from a 100-column Parquet file reads ~3% of the data. CSV reads 100%. This is why columnar matters at 5TB/day scale.

What is partitioning in file storage and why does it matter?
Partitioning organises files into folders by column value — e.g. year=2026/month=05/day=17/. When you filter on a partition column, Spark reads only the relevant folders (partition pruning) — skipping everything else. Without partitioning, Spark scans all files even if you only need one day's data.
df.write \
  .partitionBy("year", "month", "day") \
  .format("parquet") \
  .save("/mnt/data/events/")
Common follow-up: "What column should you partition by?" — Partition on columns you filter by most often. High-cardinality columns (user_id) make poor partition keys — creates millions of tiny files. Date columns are the most common choice.

What is the small file problem and how do you fix it?
Too many small files = too many tasks, excessive metadata overhead, slow reads. Causes: over-partitioning, streaming micro-batches, high-cardinality partitionBy. Fixes: 1) coalesce() before writing to reduce output files, 2) Delta Lake OPTIMIZE command compacts small files, 3) repartition() on a lower-cardinality column.
df.coalesce(10).write.format("parquet").save("/output/")

spark.sql("OPTIMIZE delta.`/mnt/delta/table` ZORDER BY (date)")
This is a real problem at scale. At Optum with 5TB/day, streaming pipelines can produce thousands of small files per hour. OPTIMIZE + ZORDER on Delta Lake is the standard fix on Databricks.

What is schema evolution and how does Delta Lake handle it?
Schema evolution = adding/changing columns in a table over time without breaking existing data. Plain Parquet fails if new columns appear. Delta Lake supports: mergeSchema (adds new columns automatically), overwriteSchema (replace schema entirely). Also enforces schema on write by default — bad data gets rejected before corrupting the table.
df.write.format("delta") \
  .option("mergeSchema", "true") \
  .mode("append") \
  .save("/mnt/delta/table")
At Deloitte you built Medallion architecture pipelines — schema enforcement at Bronze and evolution at Silver is standard practice. Mention this real context.

How do you pivot a DataFrame in PySpark?
pivot() converts row values into columns — like PIVOT in SQL. Useful for turning category values into separate columns for reporting.
df.groupBy("name") \
  .pivot("dept", ["Engineering", "Marketing", "HR"]) \
  .agg(sum("salary")) \
  .show()
Always pass the pivot values explicitly as a list — without them Spark runs an extra scan to find distinct values, which is expensive on large data.

How do you handle null values in PySpark?
from pyspark.sql.functions import col, isnan, when, coalesce, lit

df.filter(col("salary").isNull())
df.filter(col("salary").isNotNull())

df.fillna(0, subset=["salary"])
df.fillna({"salary": 0, "name": "unknown"})

df.dropna(subset=["salary", "name"])
df.dropna(how="all")

df.withColumn("salary",
    coalesce(col("salary"), col("default_salary"), lit(0)))
coalesce() returns the first non-null value from a list — great for fallback logic. Don't confuse with coalesce() for partitions — same name, completely different function.

How do you debug a slow Spark job?
Structured approach: 1) Open Spark UI → Jobs tab, find the slowest job. 2) Go to Stages tab — find the stage with longest duration and highest shuffle read/write. 3) Check Tasks tab inside that stage — if one task takes 10x longer, it is skew. 4) Check GC time — high GC = memory pressure, increase executor memory or reduce partition size. 5) Check shuffle spill — data spilling to disk means not enough memory for the shuffle.
Say this in interviews: "My first instinct is always Spark UI — specifically the Stages tab for shuffle size and the Tasks tab for skew. Code fixes come after I understand what's actually slow." This shows debugging maturity, not guesswork.

What causes OutOfMemoryError in Spark and how do you fix it?
Common causes: 1) collect() on large data — brings everything to driver. 2) Broadcasting a table that's too large. 3) Too few partitions — each task handles too much data. 4) Shuffle spill — not enough memory for sort/groupBy intermediate data. 5) Memory leak — not unpersisting cached DataFrames. Fixes: increase executor memory, increase partition count (repartition), reduce broadcast threshold, avoid collect() on large data.
spark.conf.set("spark.executor.memory", "8g")
spark.conf.set("spark.sql.shuffle.partitions", "400")
spark.conf.set("spark.sql.autoBroadcastJoinThreshold", "50mb")
Rule of thumb: partition size should be 128MB–256MB. If your data is 100GB with default 200 shuffle partitions, each partition is 500MB — too large. Set shuffle partitions to ~400-800 for that size.

What is spark.sql.shuffle.partitions and what should you set it to?
Controls how many partitions are created after a shuffle (groupBy, join). Default is 200 — fine for small data, terrible for large. Too low = large partitions, OOM risk. Too high = thousands of tiny tasks, overhead kills performance. Rule: target 128MB-256MB per partition. total_shuffle_data / target_partition_size = ideal partition count. With AQE enabled, Spark tunes this automatically.
spark.conf.set("spark.sql.shuffle.partitions", "400")

spark.conf.set("spark.sql.adaptive.enabled", "true")
With AQE on (default in Databricks), you often don't need to manually tune this — but knowing the theory is what separates 3 YOE candidates from juniors in interviews.

